---
layout: ../../layouts/MarkdownPostLayout.astro
title: Playing Through the Seasons'
pubDate: 2025-02-08
description: 'Reflections on replaying Oracle of Seasons.'
author: 'Igor'
image:
    url: 'https://docs.astro.build/assets/rose.webp'
    alt: 'The Astro logo on a dark background with a pink glow.'
tags: ["videogames", "childhood", "parenthood"]
---

### 1. It is dangerous to go alone. Take this.

​	I close my eyes and take a deep breath. The image slowly appears from within the fog of memory. Now, I can see it sharply. Look: it is a generic winter afternoon at some place in Brazil. Two kids - me and my brother -, and their father play in a football court. There are fences circling the court and a small concrete stand. Eventually, I get tired of the sport, pick up a freshly bought pack of white paper and a triangle-shaped pencil, and start to draw a fantasy-like scenario. I imagine monsters and brave-looking warriors confronting them, castles and mountain ranges. Although I can't recall the exact drawing anymore, I remember a detail: I draw human-faced clouds. They blow air -- the winds -- over the world. The ideas there are not original. They are the blend of a 9 years old immersed into fantasy universes, peering deep into fictional worlds in a quest to find something -- but what? At that time, the centerpiece of this fantastical universe is the world of the video game series Zelda. More specifically, The Legend of Zelda: Oracle of Seasons, for the Gameboy Color.

​	Zelda has a special role for many young players. It introduces a layer of complexity without making the game inaccessible. It is a deep game in a shallow mold. The plot is simple to the point of almost being offensive. It is, after all, not so different from Mario Brothers or hundreds of other such stories: the princess has been kidnapped by an evil man that intends to overtake the empire. The fate of everyone rests on the hands of a lonely orphan, the hero of a thousand faces. Instead of Bower, we have Ganondorf. One can argue that there is a proper lore over this simple structure and crazy fans have been trying for years to connect all the iterations into a single web, telling Hyrule's history over the ages. Their theories are neither true, nor false -- they simply do not matter. Lore is hardly the reason motivating people to come back to the series over and over. The common essence shared by all the Zelda titles lies elsewhere. 

​	The defining characteristic of the Zelda series is that, unlike many simpler games, there is a _world_, not a mere playground. The kingdom's inhabitants are autonomous beings. Some of them are strange, cursed, afflicted by evil fates; some are playful, while others are consumed by jealousy. The world, however, just presents itself on the surface. Link can interact with the other beings sharing his land, he can get a grasp of their existence, but he can never dive deeply into it. Link is, in some way, condemned to be a passerby, a voyeur. A **player** that only sees the drama from afar. Beyond the characters, the world itself is mysterious and invites exploration. There are waterfalls hiding secret caves, villages carved into the mountain, old forest ruins full of ghosts. Much like a child playing, Link can explore the surroundings, but never own, manage, or conquest them. The reasons for why a song opens a door are never fully understood -- those are simply the rules of an alternate universe, and they are not up for questioning or understanding.

​	Zelda is, for many, the first gaming experience to suggest that what is essentially a plaything can be more than a toy. It refuses to take the final step, to be Art with a capital A, and the clothing still is that of a proper toy, but there are hints of something more. _Suggestion_ is a powerful concept on the series' vocabulary, whose structure is heavily supported by projection. It is a cliché pointing out that Link's lack of name (which is usually filled by the player at the beginning) and proper speech is tailored as a hole for players to fit their own attributes: name, answers, and desires. Instead of embedding real agency in the game, the designers left it to the realm of imagination. Players don't need to choose between rude or friendly speech from a dialogue tree -- they simply imagine it. This is why Zelda is fundamentally a game for children. Kid's capacity for imagination, projection and dreaming is unparalleled. There are no hard boundaries between the fantastical and the concrete and fantasy often blends with reality. To imagine an answer to some dialogue is as real, if not more, as selecting an option from a menu. 

​	The Oracle games -- Oracle of Seasons and Oracle of Ages -- were released in 2001 for the Gameboy Color, at the same year of the release of the console's successor, the Gameboy Advance. They were developed by Flagship, a subsidiary of Capcom, in a rare gesture by Nintendo of lending its most cherished proprietary intellectual properties to third parties. Originally, Flagship intended to release three complementary games that could be played in any order. The complexity surpassed what they could handle and the initial proposal was reduced to two games, which is still surprising, given that they are entirely independent. A player can unlock a definitive ending by beating the two and defeating a secret boss. The 2D, top-down perspective borrows directly from their portable predecessors: the surreal The Legend of Zelda: Awakening, a game inspired (although in generic terms) by David Lynch's Twin Peaks.

​	Each one of the titles has a unique mechanic conducting the story. For Ages, the player can travel across the time, an idea already explored in other titles, such as The Legend of Zelda: Ocarina of Time (1998). Seasons, on the other hand, employs a similar but charmingly unique alternative: the rod of seasons which, as the name suggests, flip the seasons between summer, autumn, winter, spring, ... and summer. The environmental changes in the scenario are causally connected to the transformation taking place. In winter, snow accumulates; mushrooms sprout in autumn; vines grow during the summer; and flowers bloom on spring. The player acquires the seasons during the playthrough and uses them to unlock new areas and explore the map. When, halfway through the game, all the seasons are collected into the rod, Link is faced with simple puzzles exploring their interplay. The two games -- Ages and Seasons -- reflect on different sides of the time's passage. Ages draw upon the linear progression of time, while Seasons point to the cyclical nature of life.

​	I was having a hard time when I got Oracle of Seasons. At 10 years old, I faced my parents' divorce and a change of school to a new place that proved to be hostile. I watched my peers timidly leaving childhood behind, entering into teenage years, and reacted violently. I did not want to become a part of that new world. I doubled down on fantasy through books, games, magazines, and the nascent Internet. I discovered Tolkien and The Lord of the Rings, got obsessed with Japanese animation through cable television and the mangás that were starting to appear in the Brazilian newspaper stands, and began reading more and more about video games. Those were times of information scarcity. People -- specially children -- did not have access to long video content on new games and first-hand reports. There were a few magazines which published badly formated, low-res pictures, and that was it. Very often, we bought games by looking at the box art, which featured highly conceptual art, without any idea of what was expecting us. It was a context highly dependent on imagination.

​	I found out about Seasons in one of those magazines. I was presented to Zelda through Ocarina of Time and fell in love with it, even though I had not capacity of understanding what was really going on. Besides the game's complexity, the language barrier was a strong impediment, unlike simpler titles such as Mario 64 and Star Fox. That made printed walkthroughs a central part of playing. However, I still lacked any experience with the 2D titles of the series. Seasons was the first one I played. Seeing the anime-looking aesthetic, I daydreamed about exploring Holodrum, with its mysterious inhabitants. This anticipation was already part of the game, of being slowly immersed into the universe. When I finally put my hands on the transparent plastic cartridge, I already knew some of the characters - the evil General Onox, Zelda's aidée Impa, the oracle Din. I had vivid art depictions of them that enriched the actual, in game 8-bit pixel art. 

​	As a 10 years old, playing a game has multiple layers of imagination. Not only the art served to infuse the bland graphics with actual content, transforming three gray pixels into a mighty sword, but the adventure itself was born from somewhere in between the actual game and a figment my own mental constructs. When I got to Holodrum, I would infer personalities from simple dialogues, which most of the time were incomprehensible to me. I remember entering the first dungeon, the Gnarled Root. I did not know the world 'gnarled', and the image of the pixelated rotten tree trunk became forever synonymous with the adjective in my mind. Entering in Subrosia, the underground realm where the Temple of Seasons sunk, I would walk carefully, such as not to call out attention of its strange inhabitants, the Subrosians. **This is why nostalgia is a never solved by going back to its origin. I could play similar games to those of my childhood as much as I could, but I would never be able to recreate the deeply imaginative interaction with them I had in the past. This imaginative interplay is, of course, what gives a unique value to the experience in the first place**. 

​	Oracle of Seasons was the game I took with myself to the first family trip in this new post-divorce family setting, and exploring Holodrum was a task performed daily, almost ritualistically, by the bed, equipped with a worm light, given the lack of back light that Nintendo would only fix definitively in the Gameboy Advance SP, in 2003. I didn't finish the game at that holiday. In fact, I did not finish it at all. Leaving games behind was almost the rule for me at that age. The lack of ability of a child combined with the already mentioned language barrier and the overall shortness of my attention span ensured that I seldom finished games. I would play for a while and then abandon them in a corner of the house. Because games were expensive, I would often get back to them, usually getting stuck at the same or similar place, rinse and repeat. I played Oracle of Seasons for a couple of months. Most of the play sessions resulted in no progress, something that I find a bit absurd as an adult, but that really did not bother me as a child. I would enter the world looking for something, without any real expectation of finding anything. Not finding was the rule, which made the rare occasions when I did encounter a piece of the puzzle more enticing. I have memories of the joy I felt when I finally found Ricky, the kangaroo depicted in the manual. With him, Link could ride to jump over high walls. I also recall grappling a Cuckoo to fly to the top of a mountain just before leaving my house for school. I had to finish what I was doing because I did not knew for certain how I got to that particular place and the game did not start over from the same place after a reboot. Eventually, I got the Gameboy Advance, with its shiny new games -- Super Mario Bros. 2, F-Zero: Maximum Velocity, and Tony Hawk: Pro Skater 2 --, and Zelda went back to the cardboard box in which I stored my portable games.



### 2. Everything not saved is lost.

​	Time passed linearly. I outgrew most of the things that were at the core of my 10 years old existence. I got into university and slowly left fantastical universes behind. video games ceased to occupy a central part of my life. I had bought the Nintendo Wii in 2009, and by 2010 I had no desire to turn it on. I stored my collection of portable games in a cardboard box in my wardrobe and forgot it there. The Wii was sold for extra cash, but somehow I could not do the same to the older portable consoles and their games. They seemed too strongly connected to an earlier version of myself and throwing them away would constitute a form of self-denial and erasure of my own subjectivity. They remained there, even if, at the time, I had no intention of going back to them, until...

​	Until I had a New Year's trip with my in laws. We were going to spend a few days in a cottage on Brazil's south-east mountain range. While I was packing, something in the old carboard called my attention. It was almost if it whispered my name -- *do you remember the old times*? I can't reconstruct my reasoning with precision. It certainly sounds childish and not something that one does while trying to impress their girlfriend's family, but nonetheless I took the Gameboy and the Zelda cartridge with me. We would hike, and cook, and swim during the day. There was no electricity at the cottage, and I'd play the game at night.

​	It was strange, to re-enter Holodrum after so many years. I didn't felt exactly as Link adventuring in a brand-new land. I felt as if I had just entered a time machine and peered into my old room, full of my old, untouched, dusty artifacts. Human brains have an inclination for association -- they connect everything to everything and seemingly unrelated things do flare up very strong reminiscences. The so called _Madeleine Effect_ was described and popularized by the French writer Michel Proust -- one of his characters has a strong flashback while eating a madaleine, a small, shell-shaped French cake. For those that prefer a more low brow reference, this same psychological phenomena was also depicted on Pixar's Ratatouille, when the severe critic munches the mouse-cooked dish that names the movie. For me, every corner of the old Zelda world reminded me of situations long forgotten. Walking through Holodrum, I saw the world through the eyes of a younger self, encountered things that I did not even remember I had lost, relived fears that were no more. Going into Subrosia to perform the dance class and get the boomerang, I was unsure if I was traveling with my girlfriend's family or with my brother on that long gone winter.

​	After we came back from the trip, I continued playing the game for a few days. It's a middle-age cliché, but I do miss the sheer amount of time I had on summer vacations. I advanced slowly through the plot, but ended up getting bored (or more interested on something else), and the game went back into the beaten cardboard box. The Oracle games use a three slots save files structure, as is traditional with the series. Now, there were two filled slots: the first one, untouched since I was 10 years old, and the second one, left behind when I was 19, when I briefly went back to glance at my younger self. There was still one unused slot.

​	In the end of 2023, in a short interval of a few days, two things happened. My childhood home, the place where I was born and grew into, was finally sold after a long interval in the market. This happened in a very auspicious time, as I was living there and had just found out that I was going to become a father. The timing was perfect aligned with the symbology -- there is no greater marker of the transition to adulthood than the transition from _being cared for_ to _care for_, materialized by the arrival of a child, a brand-new human being. 

​	In the weeks that followed, we slowly went through everything in the house. We filled up boxes, examined old books, dismembered cabinets, and cleaned 30 years of memory sediments. It was a slow job. Sometimes painful, sometimes cheerful. I had to stop a few times. It was particularly hard to separate my grandfather's book -- the ones that I could take with me from the ones that I had to give away. At times, deciding to get rid of a volume felt like a treason. After some weeks, we succeeded, cleared the house of everything, and closed the door protecting barren walls behind us definitively. Amongst the things that I brought with me was the old cardboard box with a handful portable games.

​	We spent some months living out of our luggages while we managed to decide and finish the deal on our new home. We spent some time in a somewhat awful Airbnb and then moved into a spare room in my in laws. When everything was ready, we moved into a new apartment. In the first days, there was a huge, totem-like pile of cardboard boxes that the moving company left there. The tower went almost to the ceiling and was positioned right into the middle of the living room. It was eye-opening to see very concretely the sheer amount of stuff we accumulate, even after the brutal Mary Kondo-like clearing we done some months earlier. The boxes stored everything from kitchen utensils to books -- and, of course, old Gameboy cartridges. It was too much to do in one effort; hence, over the next weeks, we slowly worked the pile, freeing small chunks of objects, one of a time. Books went into shelves; pans, into kitchen cabinets; clothes, into wardrobes. 

​	One of the last boxes was the one with the games. I carefully arranged them into a drawer in the office-room. Its hard to contain oneself while manipulating the old consoles and cartridges -- do they work? After so many years, how do they look? Would I still have fun? And so, while procrastinating on actually arranging the apartment, I decided to turn them on. It was a lazy Sunday afternoon when I played a bit of the most accessible games. I played a couple of stages of Rayman, for the Gameboy Color -- one of my first cartridges and one that I'm still very fond of --, a couple of Super Mario World levels for the GBA, one or two races of F-Zero: Maximum Velocity, and a few rounds of Street Fighter II: Turbo Edition, also for the GBA. I had finished each one of those games in the past. Some of them, more than once. But there was one game in the case that kept facing me. It was The Legend of Zelda: Oracle of Seasons, a stylish transparent cartridge with a red label. I looked and wondered: _what if_? I definitely did not have the time, and I had failed before, and therefore, maybe precisely for these reasons, I decided to fit into the Gameboy Advance SP and re-enter Holodrum. I had left some childhood issues unresolved, and I wanted to fix them before my son was born.



### 3. Open Your Eyes

​	At some point, I had this strange feeling -- it was more a feeling than an actual belief -- that if I didn't finish a task, if I left an item to do, time would not progress definitively and irreversibly. If I kept adding new chapters to the story, as Sheherazade to the Sultan, I wouldn't die and a new day would arise again and again. In a narrow sense, this is true. If I didn't finish the game, its world would be  always there as a possibility, expecting to be unveiled. If I progressed to the very end and defeated the final boss, on the other hand, the magic would vanish into the air. Even if I could replay, it would not be the same thing. The sense of _discovery_ would not exist anymore. Procrastinating on finishing things is, in some way, a manner of keeping the candle burning in a forgotten corner of the room.

​	However, postponing a task indefinitely is also a testament of our own failing and finiteness. After all, starting a journey and not getting to the end is a _failure_ of some kind. Starting is easy and is fueled by momentary bouts of motivation; finishing, on the other hand, requires grit, tenacity, skill, and persistence. This may sound as over the top dramatic -- I am talking about a video game intended for children, after all -- but one may argue that the most banal and trite matter make up the core of our lives and the substance of one's own character is somehow the sum of all those insignificant gestures. With those thoughts in my mind, and a bit of boredom, I made a decision: this time, I would not only start the game, but I would finish it. I would make into the credits screen. If I couldn't do this simple task, how could I expect to take care of a human being?

​	The beginning of the third playthrough was similar to the second one in the sense that every Holodrum's corner was filled with memories. The sediments of my own past were deposited into the game's world. I was getting both memories of my childhood and my early adulthood. The memory layers that got attached to the game didn't make it deeper, though. This time, I noticed that some of the _magic_ that I felt while playing it in the past was getting thinner by the hour, sometimes almost to the point of becoming imperceptible. The eerie corners of the world didn't house secrets that I could not access. Either they had actual secrets put there by conscious game designers, such as heart containers and special items, or they stored predefined dialogue, procedurally placed items and erratic monsters. There was no deep mystery behind the characters and their interactions that I did not know of, no inner life that ran its course behind the scenes. I was dominated by the sensation, quite based on reality, that the characters were simply the few lines of dialogue that they repeated. Souless amounts of pixels with no hidden aspirations. I perceived the game as if a sepia filter had been cast over it. 

​	One of the main motivations for retro gaming is the quest for capture, even if momentarily, the fleeting sensation of childhood. As with Pierre Menard, who tries to rewrite Don Quixote by going through the same experiences lived by Cervantes, people try to recover their lost childhood by interacting with the objects of their past as if they were magical artifacts capable of conjuring up their former selves. They mostly fail because what they are looking for is not the actual game they played, the movie they watched, or the book they read, but the inner life they had when they lived through those experiences and the fleeting sensations that they felt once. And those are, up to a certain level, simply unrecoverable.

​	Even then, I had brand new remarkable interactions with the game. Along the way, two villagers have a baby. For some reason, they let you choose the child's name. At that point, it was obvious to me that I should name him with the name that we had chosen for our actual, yet-to-come son. This even made me wonder: what names did I chose on my past playthroughs? Did they reveal something about me? Probably, only that having a child was too far removed from my world at the time to give any semblance of importance to this decision. _I did not care by then, and I certainly did now_. As the game progresses, the villager's child become sick, and they ask Link for help. By then, I was immersed in the literature about baby development and my mind wandered daily through hosts of questions ranging from 'can the mother drink herbal tea?' and 'is sushi safe to eat?' to 'what are the effects of folate supplementation in the first trimester?'. Hence, it is not that surprising that facing a virtual child -- and one that shared the name of my future son! -- getting sick struck a chord deep within me. The player is faced with several options on how to react to the villager's plead, and I just gave the maximum possible amount of rupees without second guessing it. Later, I would check on them to see the how he was doing (he was fine, thankfully). Some of the magic of _playing_ is still there, for those able to see, but it may be a different kind from that of one's childhood.

​	Eventually, I progressed beyond all my old playthroughs, which also inspired a unique feeling. Up to this point, I was more or less re-watching a familiar movie. I was expecting the monsters in the corner and knew beforehand what would happen when. Even if I did not know everything by heart, I still had a general sense of how things progressed. This colored the play sessions with _familiarity_ -- 'so, now I must get to that kangaroo that allows me to climb this wall'. After I overcame my past progress, I finally found myself in uncharted territory. I did not know what would happen, where to go, or how to proceed. I had no idea of which magic items that were still missing from my inventory. I got stuck a few times and felt a familiar sense of impatience. The old school game development philosophy did not bother to explain too much and sometimes the progress came by trying everything possible and simply getting lucky. Just talk with every character on the map and expect a tip out of nowhere, for example. It was certainly different -- and interesting! -- to recapture the game's sense of wonder and exploration that only exists while you don't really know what to expect. This feeling, common on my earlier playthroughs, came back precisely on the parts that I had not played before. Novelty is the magic elixir that conjured it. 

​	Nonetheless, I failed my self-imposed quest. Or, at least, I did not match my official objective, *i.e.*, to finish the game before my son's birth. As the weeks passed, adult life overtook the time, energy, and motivation I had to play the game. As the expected date approached, the days got shorter and shorter. Finally, in a day that could be like any other, my life was forever transformed. I will not even try to describe the period that followed. Either this belongs to the a realm beyond what language can capture, or it simply is surpasses my capabilities as a writer. And this text's topic is supposedly Zelda: Oracle of Seasons.

​	I had failed the original objective, but already in the first weeks I learned that making compromises was an essential part of parenting. If you can't sleep 6 hours, you have to make ends meet with 5, 4, or even 3. Heck, maybe you'll get no sleep besides a short afternoon nap, and you still have to keep on going. As the initial dust from life with a newborn started to settle, and while I still had some parental leave time, the transparent plastic of the cartridge started to capture my attention once more. _Will you fail again?_, it inquired. No, I will not. I shouldn't. I took a metaphorical deep breath and prepared myself to the last remaining dungeon and the final boss fight. I was going to solve this, once for all. On a Sunday morning, I got to the final castle and, after two tries, I beat up Onox, the General Of Darkness, a somewhat empty final boss, whose motivation I could never really understand. Then, I saw the credits rolling. After 23 years, I had finally completed the game.

​	While I played Oracle of Seasons, I frequently reflected on the effects of time's passage. I confronted the memory fragments that we deposit on objects and narratives exterior to us, and how them acquire a quasi-magical capability of evoking feelings long gone. And, despite that, I mused over how vain is the nostalgia-infused quest for reliving the past, specially one's own childhood. Time does not regress and all we can do is contemplate our older selves looking from afar, as if waving from a parting ship in a harbor filled with fog. The magic of not knowing, of imagining a lot and projecting it into the world, is essentially not recoverable.

​	And yet, it is recoverable in some unexpected way. A little bit after I was given the Zelda cartridge, I went to a summer camp. By then, I was living something akin to a depression. I was deeply unhappy, confused, and lonely. My mother thought it was a good idea to send me to this camp so I could interact and play with other children. I, of course, just wanted to play my Gameboy, and she was kind enough to let me stay glued to the screen until I got into the bus. For some reason, that morning became engraved in my memory. She took me to a small park from where the bus would depart. I had my eyes fixed on the screen until the last minute. I saw the children running, and a line of trees filtered the light coming from the sun above. That small park seemed gigantic: the trees reached up to the sky, and time passed so slow that it was almost as if it did not move at all. I could not imagine that 23 years from then I would move to that neighborhood, and that my newborn son would love very early walks through that very park. For weeks, I circled the small trail three or four times before heading back to our home to have breakfast. The trees had shrunk, the park did not seem to extend itself beyond my sight, and time was definitely passing by at increasing speed. But I got to see that enormity of the past once more -- in my son's eyes, I saw the amazement of looking to such big trees, the reactions to the violence of the morotcycle's sound, and the soothing properties of bird chirps. Seeing every small new achievement and the intensity of each new feeling I realized that the way to recover childhood is not trying to once again becoming a child, but by _giving_ a childhood to someone else. When time comes, perhaps I'll gift him his a sword, a green tunic, and a sturdy pair of boots. Then perhaps a hero will again wander through the beaten paths of Holodrum.